BZ#2065695: PAO - cnf-tests Documentation of PAO should not cover all cnf-tests as only the latency launchers are supported (#44823)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/cnf-performing-platform-verification-latency-tests.adoc

// Module included in the following assemblies:
// scalability_and_performance/cnf-performance-addon-operator-for-low-latency-nodes.adoc

:_content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="cnf-performing-platform-verification-latency-tests_{context}"]
= Performing latency tests for platform verification

> You can use the link:https://quay.io/repository/openshift-kni/cnf-tests?tag=latest&tab=tags[Cloud-native Network Functions (CNF) tests image] to run latency tests on a CNF-enabled {product-title} cluster where all the components required for running CNF workloads are installed. The latency tests allows you to validate node tuning for your workload.

Reviewer: quay should not be used in the documentation for images of red-hat products. please use the official one instead.

Author: Updated.

[IMPORTANT]
====

> The `cnf-tests` image also includes several tests that are not supported by Red Hat at this time. Only the latency tests are supported.

Author: Are you sure? check first comment from Franck here: https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=2065695

> The `cnf-tests` image also includes several tests that are not supported by Red Hat at this time. Only the latency tests are supported.

Reviewer: ok I see, then we can move on with this.

====

[id="cnf-performing-end-to-end-tests-prerequisites_{context}"]
== Prerequisites

. You have installed the Performance Addon Operator.

. You have configured a performance profile.

. You have applied all the required CNF configurations in the cluster.

. You have a pre-existing `MachineConfigPool` CR applied in the cluster. The default worker pool is `worker-cnf`. For more information about creating the cluster performance profile, see _Provisioning a worker with real-time capabilities_.

[id="discovery-mode_{context}"]
== About discovery mode

Discovery mode allows you to validate the functionality of a cluster without altering its configuration. Existing environment configurations are used for the tests. The tests attempt to find the configuration items needed and use those items to execute the tests. If resources needed to run a specific test are not found, the test is skipped, providing an appropriate message to the user. After the tests are finished, no cleanup of the pre-configured configuration items is done, and the test environment can be immediately used for another test run.

> Some configuration items are still created by the tests. These are specific items needed for a test to run; for example, an SR-IOV Network. These configuration items are created in custom namespaces and are cleaned up after the tests are executed.

Reviewer: not relevant sentence any more.

> Some configuration items are still created by the tests. These are specific items needed for a test to run; for example, an SR-IOV Network. These configuration items are created in custom namespaces and are cleaned up after the tests are executed.

Reviewer: not relevant sentence any more.

[IMPORTANT]
====

> When running the latency tests, **always** run the tests with `-e DISCOVERY_MODE=true`. If you do not run the latency tests in discovery mode, your existing live cluster performance profile configuration will be modified.

Reviewer: it is recommended to run with discovery mode, but running the tests without it will:
- fail the tests if there is no relevant PP for the worker-cnf nodes
- use the existing PP 
code reference: https://github.com/openshift-kni/performance-addon-operators/blob/master/functests/4_latency/latency.go#L88
I believe this note was relevant for the other functional tests and not the latency ones.
@Tal-or @MarSik  please confirm/ correct me if I am wrong

Author: @MarSik Can you PTAL at this one please.

Reviewer 2: This is going to customers. We want to be 100% sure they will not trash their cluster accidentally. Running without discovery mode and accidentally without focus will do that to them.

Author: "[IMPORTANT]
====
When running the latency tests, **always** run the tests with `-e DISCOVERY_MODE=true` and `-ginkgo.focus` set to the appropriate latency test. If you do not run the latency tests in discovery mode, your existing live cluster performance profile configuration will be modified by the test run.
===="

====

[id="limiting-nodes-used-during-tests_{context}"]
=== Limiting the nodes used during tests

The nodes on which the tests are executed can be limited by specifying a `NODES_SELECTOR` environment variable, for example, `-e NODES_SELECTOR=node-role.kubernetes.io/worker-cnf`. Any resources created by the test are limited to nodes with matching labels.

[NOTE]
====
If you want to override the default worker pool, pass the `-e ROLE_WORKER_CNF=<custom_worker_pool>` variable to the command specifying an appropriate label.
====

[id="cnf-measuring-latency_{context}"]
== Measuring latency

The `cnf-tests` image uses three tools to measure the latency of the system:

* `hwlatdetect`

> * `cyclictest`

Reviewer: supported only for > 4.8

Reviewer: the current PR is applicable only to 4.11 and 4.12 (master - not yet released).

|`LATENCY_TEST_RUNTIME`
|The variable specifies the amount of time in seconds that the latency test must run. The default value is 300 seconds.

|`HWLATDETECT_MAXIMUM_LATENCY`
|The variable specifies the maximum acceptable hardware latency in microseconds for the workload and operating system. If you do not set the value of `HWLATDETECT_MAXIMUM_LATENCY` or `MAXIMUM_LATENCY`, the tool compares the default expected threshold (20μs) and the actual maximum latency in the tool itself. Then, the test fails or succeeds accordingly.

|`CYCLICTEST_MAXIMUM_LATENCY`
|The variable specifies the maximum latency in microseconds that all threads expect before waking up during the `cyclictest` run. If you do not set the value of `CYCLICTEST_MAXIMUM_LATENCY` or `MAXIMUM_LATENCY`, the tool skips the comparison of the expected and the actual maximum latency.

|`OSLAT_MAXIMUM_LATENCY`
|The variable specifies the maximum acceptable latency in microseconds for the `oslat` test results. If you do not set the value of `OSLAT_MAXIMUM_LATENCY` or `MAXIMUM_LATENCY`, the tool skips the comparison of the expected and the actual maximum latency.

|`MAXIMUM_LATENCY`

> |This is a unified variable you can apply for all the available latency tools.

Reviewer: better: "This is a unified variable to specify the maximum acceptable latency in microseconds applicable for all available latency tools."

|====

[NOTE]
====

> A variable that is specific to certain tests has precedence over the unified variable.

Reviewer: better: 
"A variable that is specific to a certain latency tool has precedence over the unified variable. So if OSLAT_MAXIMUM_LATENCY is set to 30 microseconds and MAXIMUM_LATENCY is set to 10 microseconds, the comparison of the actual maximum latency is done vs OSLAT_MAXIMUM_LATENCY."

====

[id="cnf-performing-end-to-end-tests-running-the-tests_{context}"]
== Running the latency tests

Run the latency tests against the cluster by completing the following steps:

. Open a shell prompt in the directory containing the `kubeconfig` file.
+
You provide the test image with a `kubeconfig` file in current directory and its related `$KUBECONFIG` environment variable, mounted through a volume. This allows the running container to use the `kubeconfig` file from inside the container.

. Run the latency tests by entering the following command:
+
[source,terminal,subs="attributes+"]
----
$ podman run -v $(pwd)/:/kubeconfig:Z -e KUBECONFIG=/kubeconfig/kubeconfig \
-e DISCOVERY_MODE=true registry.redhat.io/openshift4/cnf-tests-rhel8:v{product-version} \
/usr/bin/test-run.sh -ginkgo.focus="\[performance\]\ Latency\ Test"
----
+
[IMPORTANT]
====

> You must run the latency tests with `-e DISCOVERY_MODE=true`. The latency tests can change the configuration of your cluster if you do not run in Discovery mode.

Reviewer: repeated note, see above comments.

====

. Optional: Append `-ginkgo.dryRun` to run the latency tests in dry-run mode. This is useful for checking what the tests run.

. Optional: Append `-ginkgo.v` to run the tests with increased verbosity.

. Optional: To run the latency tests against a specific performance profile, run the following command, substituting appropriate values:
+
[source,terminal,subs="attributes+"]
----
$ podman run -v $(pwd)/:/kubeconfig:Z -e KUBECONFIG=/kubeconfig/kubeconfig \
-e LATENCY_TEST_RUN=true -e LATENCY_TEST_RUNTIME=600 -e OSLAT_MAXIMUM_LATENCY=20 \
-e PERF_TEST_PROFILE=<performance_profile> registry.redhat.io/openshift4/cnf-tests-rhel8:v{product-version} \

> /usr/bin/test-run.sh -ginkgo.focus="\[performance\]\[config\]|\[performance\]\ Latency\ Test"

Reviewer: please change ginkgo focus value to :
"\[performance\]\ Latency\ Test"

----
+
where:
+
--
<performance_profile> :: Is the name of the performance profile you want to run the latency tests against.
--

[id="cnf-performing-end-to-end-tests-running-hwlatdetect"]
=== Running hwlatdetect

The `hwlatdetect` tool is available in the `rt-kernel` package with a regular subscription of Red Hat Enterprise Linux 8.

.Prerequisites:

* You have installed the real-time kernel in the cluster

* You have logged in to `registry.redhat.io` with your Customer Portal credentials

.Procedure

* To run the `hwlatdetect` tests, run the following command, substituting variable values as appropriate:
+
[source,terminal,subs="attributes+"]
----
$ podman run -v $(pwd)/:/kubeconfig:Z -e KUBECONFIG=/kubeconfig/kubeconfig \
-e LATENCY_TEST_RUN=true -e DISCOVERY_MODE=true -e ROLE_WORKER_CNF=worker-cnf \

> -e LATENCY_TEST_CPUS=600 -e LATENCY_TEST_RUNTIME=600 \

Reviewer: 600 is not a valid value for LATENCY_TEST_CPUS. this is an optional env var, you can remove it from the command.

Reviewer: also, it doesn't match the output, the output matches a command that LATENCY_TEST_CPUS was not specified in it.

-e MAXIMUM_LATENCY=20 registry.redhat.io/openshift4/cnf-tests-rhel8:v{product-version} \
/usr/bin/test-run.sh -ginkgo.v -ginkgo.focus="hwlatdetect"
----
+
`hwlatdetect` runs for 10 minutes (600 seconds). The test runs successfully when the maximum observed latency is lower than `MAXIMUM_LATENCY` (20 μs).
+
[NOTE]
====
For valid results, the test should run for at least 12 hours.
====

> +

Reviewer: Let's move this note to the beginning of the latency section, this is an important one and valid for all tools.

If the results exceed the latency threshold, the test fails.
+
.Example failure output
[source,terminal]
----
running /usr/bin/cnftests -ginkgo.v -ginkgo.focus=hwlatdetect
I0908 15:25:20.023712      27 request.go:601] Waited for 1.046586367s due to client-side throttling, not priority and fairness, request: GET:https://api.hlxcl6.lab.eng.tlv2.redhat.com:6443/apis/imageregistry.operator.openshift.io/v1?timeout=32s
Running Suite: CNF Features e2e integration tests
=================================================
Random Seed: 1662650718
Will run 1 of 194 specs

[...]

• Failure [283.574 seconds]
[performance] Latency Test
/remote-source/app/vendor/github.com/openshift/cluster-node-tuning-operator/test/e2e/performanceprofile/functests/4_latency/latency.go:62
  with the hwlatdetect image
  /remote-source/app/vendor/github.com/openshift/cluster-node-tuning-operator/test/e2e/performanceprofile/functests/4_latency/latency.go:228
    should succeed [It]

>     /remote-source/app/vendor/github.com/openshift/cluster-node-tuning-operator/test/e2e/performanceprofile/functests/4_latency/latency.go:236

Reviewer: Note that this is relevant for 4.11/4.12 releases, where the tests exist in NTO. for other versions please consider using the old command outputs as per each version documentation considering the availability of the tools in each version (hwlat and cyclictest are available since 4.9)

Author: Cool. Let's get this merged to main/enterprise-4.11+, and then I will manually CP and adjust for previous versions.

ts: 1610543033.818801482, inner:29, outer:30
ts: 1610543080.938801990, inner:90, outer:76
ts: 1610543129.065549639, inner:28, outer:39
ts: 1610543474.859552115, inner:28, outer:35
ts: 1610543523.973856571, inner:52, outer:49
ts: 1610543572.089799738, inner:27, outer:30
ts: 1610543573.091550771, inner:34, outer:28
ts: 1610543574.093555202, inner:116, outer:63
----

The output of `hwlatdetect` shows that multiple samples exceed the threshold. However, the same output can indicate different results based on the following factors:

* The duration of the test
* The number of CPU cores
* The BIOS settings

[WARNING]
====
Before proceeding with the next latency test, ensure that the number measured by `hwlatdetect` meets the required threshold. Fixing latencies introduced by hardware might require you to contact the system vendor support.
====

[id="cnf-performing-end-to-end-tests-running-cyclictest"]
=== Running cyclictest

The `cyclictest` tool measures the real-time kernel scheduler latency on the specified CPUs.

.Prerequisites

* You have logged into `registry.redhat.io` with your Customer Portal credentials.
* You have installed the real-time kernel in the cluster.

> * You have applied a cluster performance profile by using Node Tuning Operator.

Reviewer: same note regaing versions, this is relevant only for 4.11 and above. for <4.11 we use Performance addon operator

More histogram entries ...
# Total: 000599999 000599999 000599999 000599997 000599997 000599998 000599998 000599997 000599997 000599996 000599995 000599996 000599995 000599995 000599995 000599993
# Min Latencies: 00002 00002 00002 00002 00002 00002 00002 00002 00002 00002 00002 00002 00002 00002 00002 00002
# Avg Latencies: 00002 00002 00002 00002 00002 00002 00002 00002 00002 00002 00002 00002 00002 00002 00002 00002
# Max Latencies: 00493 00387 00271 00619 00541 00513 00009 00389 00252 00215 00539 00498 00363 00204 00068 00520
# Histogram Overflows: 00001 00001 00001 00002 00002 00001 00000 00001 00001 00001 00002 00001 00001 00001 00001 00002
# Histogram Overflow at cycle number:
# Thread 0: 155922
# Thread 1: 110064
# Thread 2: 110064
# Thread 3: 110063 155921
# Thread 4: 110063 155921
# Thread 5: 155920
# Thread 6:
# Thread 7: 110062
# Thread 8: 110062
# Thread 9: 155919
# Thread 10: 110061 155919
# Thread 11: 155918
# Thread 12: 155918
# Thread 13: 110060
# Thread 14: 110060
# Thread 15: 110059 155917
----

[id="cnf-performing-end-to-end-tests-running-oslat"]
=== Running oslat

.Prerequisites

* You have logged into `registry.redhat.io` with your Customer Portal credentials.

> * You have applied a cluster performance profile by using the Node Tuning Operator.

Reviewer: same here

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * scalability_and_performance/cnf-low-latency-tuning.adoc

:_content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="cnf-performing-platform-verification-latency-tests_{context}"]
= Performing latency tests for platform verification

You can use the Cloud-native Network Functions (CNF) tests image to run latency tests on a CNF-enabled {product-title} cluster where all the components required for running CNF workloads are installed. The latency tests allows you to validate node tuning for your workload.

> The `cnf-tests` container image is available at `registry.redhat.io/openshift4/cnf-tests-rhel8:v{product-version}`.

Reviewer 3: You might want to check if the inline {product-version} attribute works without the `subs="attributes+"`

Author: It does :)

ts: 1610542445.332549975, inner:39, outer:38
ts: 1610542541.568546097, inner:47, outer:32
ts: 1610542590.681548531, inner:13, outer:17
ts: 1610543033.818801482, inner:29, outer:30
ts: 1610543080.938801990, inner:90, outer:76
ts: 1610543129.065549639, inner:28, outer:39
ts: 1610543474.859552115, inner:28, outer:35
ts: 1610543523.973856571, inner:52, outer:49
ts: 1610543572.089799738, inner:27, outer:30
ts: 1610543573.091550771, inner:34, outer:28
ts: 1610543574.093555202, inner:116, outer:63
----

The output of `hwlatdetect` shows that multiple samples exceed the threshold. However, the same output can indicate different results based on the following factors:

* The duration of the test
* The number of CPU cores
* The BIOS settings

[WARNING]
====
Before proceeding with the next latency test, ensure that the number measured by `hwlatdetect` meets the required threshold. Fixing latencies introduced by hardware might require you to contact the system vendor support.
====

[id="cnf-performing-end-to-end-tests-running-cyclictest"]
=== Running cyclictest

The `cyclictest` tool measures the real-time kernel scheduler latency on the specified CPUs.

.Prerequisites

> * You have logged into `registry.redhat.io` with your Customer Portal credentials.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* You have logged in to `registry.redhat.io` with your Customer Portal credentials.
```

More histogram entries ...
# Total: 000599999 000599999 000599999 000599997 000599997 000599998 000599998 000599997 000599997 000599996 000599995 000599996 000599995 000599995 000599995 000599993
# Min Latencies: 00002 00002 00002 00002 00002 00002 00002 00002 00002 00002 00002 00002 00002 00002 00002 00002
# Avg Latencies: 00002 00002 00002 00002 00002 00002 00002 00002 00002 00002 00002 00002 00002 00002 00002 00002
# Max Latencies: 00493 00387 00271 00619 00541 00513 00009 00389 00252 00215 00539 00498 00363 00204 00068 00520
# Histogram Overflows: 00001 00001 00001 00002 00002 00001 00000 00001 00001 00001 00002 00001 00001 00001 00001 00002
# Histogram Overflow at cycle number:
# Thread 0: 155922
# Thread 1: 110064
# Thread 2: 110064
# Thread 3: 110063 155921
# Thread 4: 110063 155921
# Thread 5: 155920
# Thread 6:
# Thread 7: 110062
# Thread 8: 110062
# Thread 9: 155919
# Thread 10: 110061 155919
# Thread 11: 155918
# Thread 12: 155918
# Thread 13: 110060
# Thread 14: 110060
# Thread 15: 110059 155917
----

[id="cnf-performing-end-to-end-tests-running-oslat"]
=== Running oslat

.Prerequisites

> * You have logged into `registry.redhat.io` with your Customer Portal credentials.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* You have logged in to `registry.redhat.io` with your Customer Portal credentials.
```

cnf-tests-local:latest /usr/bin/test-run.sh -ginkgo.focus="\[performance\]\ Latency\ Test"
----

[id="mirroring-different-set-of-images_{context}"]
=== Mirroring a different set of images

.Procedure

. The `mirror` command tries to mirror the upstream images by default. This can be overridden by passing a file with the following format to the image:
+
[source,yaml]
----
[
    {
        "registry": "public.registry.io:5000",
        "image": "imageforcnftests:4.10"
    }
]
----

. Pass the file to the `mirror` command, for example saving it locally as `images.json`. With the following command, the local path is mounted in `/kubeconfig` inside the container and that can be passed to the mirror command.
+
[source,terminal,subs="attributes+"]
----
$ podman run -v $(pwd)/:/kubeconfig:Z \
-e KUBECONFIG=/kubeconfig/kubeconfig -e IMAGE_REGISTRY=registry.redhat.io/openshift4/ \
-e CNF_TESTS_IMAGE=cnf-tests-rhel8:v{product-version} /usr/bin/mirror \
--registry "my.local.registry:5000/" --images "/kubeconfig/images.json" \
|  oc image mirror -f -
----

[id="cnf-performing-end-to-end-tests-running-in-single-node-cluster_{context}"]
== Running latency tests on a {sno} cluster

> You can runn latency tests on {sno} clusters.

Reviewer 4: Looks like typo here runn

// Module included in the following assemblies:
// scalability_and_performance/cnf-performance-addon-operator-for-low-latency-nodes.adoc

:_content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="cnf-performing-platform-verification-latency-tests_{context}"]
= Performing latency tests for platform verification

The link:https://quay.io/repository/openshift-kni/cnf-tests?tag=latest&tab=tags[Cloud-native Network Functions (CNF) tests image] is a containerized test suite that validates features required to run CNF payloads. You can use this image to run latency tests on a CNF-enabled {product-title} cluster where all the components required for running CNF workloads are installed.

The tests run by the image are split into three different phases:

* Simple cluster validation
* Setup
* End to end tests

> The latency tests require validations. The validation phase checks that all the features required to be tested are deployed correctly on the cluster. Validations include:

Reviewer 5: Why do we even want to list the tests below? I'd just remove everything

* Enabling the `contain-mount-namespace` mode via machine config
* Using OVN-kubernetes as the cluster network provider

[NOTE]
====
The CNF tests image includes several tests that are not supported by Red Hat at this time. Only the latency tests are supported.
====

[IMPORTANT]
====
When running the latency tests, **always** run the tests with `DISCOVERY_MODE=true`. For example:

[source,terminal]
----
$ podman run -v $(pwd)/:/kubeconfig:Z -e KUBECONFIG=/kubeconfig/kubeconfig -e

> DISCOVERY_MODE=true registry.redhat.io/openshift-kni/cnf-tests /usr/bin/test-run.sh

Reviewer 5: This will run the full set of tests. We should be specific about latency tests

Author: I've updated this and the rest. We'll need to walk through this on a call I think.

Some configuration items are still created by the tests. These are specific items needed for a test to run; for example, an SR-IOV Network. These configuration items are created in custom namespaces and are cleaned up after the tests are executed.

To run the latency tests, you must set `DISCOVERY_MODE` to true, for example:

[source,terminal]
----
$ podman run -v $(pwd)/:/kubeconfig:Z -e KUBECONFIG=/kubeconfig/kubeconfig -e
DISCOVERY_MODE=true registry.redhat.io/openshift-kni/cnf-tests /usr/bin/test-run.sh
----

[id="limiting-nodes-used-during-tests_{context}"]
=== Limiting the nodes used during tests

The nodes on which the tests are executed can be limited by specifying a `NODES_SELECTOR` environment variable. Any resources created by the test are then limited to the specified nodes.

[source,terminal]
----

> $ podman run -v $(pwd)/:/kubeconfig:Z -e KUBECONFIG=/kubeconfig/kubeconfig -e DISCOVERY_MODE=true NODES_SELECTOR=node-role.kubernetes.io/worker-cnf registry.redhat.io/openshift-kni/cnf-tests /usr/bin/test-run.sh

Reviewer 5: Is this section relevant to the latency tests?
